mitosis-bluetooth/README.md, before:

# Mitosis-Bluetooth

Bluetooth firmware for the Mitosis keyboard (BLE and Gazell timesharing via timeslot API)

## Video

[![](http://img.youtube.com/vi/Qv22OyWb81g/0.jpg)](https://youtu.be/Qv22OyWb81g)

## Precompiled Firmware

* [mitosis-bt.hex] (firmware upgrade for the right half, turns Mitosis into a fully wireless split Bluetooth HID keyboard)

You need to flash the right half only.
Use [ST-LINK/V2] and [OpenOCD].
Precompiled firmware is already merged with softdevice s130 so you don't need to flash softdevice first.

```
openocd -f interface/stlink-v2.cfg -f target/nrf51.cfg ^
-c init -c "reset halt" -c "flash write_image erase mitosis-bt.hex" -c reset -c exit
```

Current firmware version switches into a System Off mode after a few minutes of inactivity to save the battery,
and wakes up on hardware interrupt (any key, usually you press something on a home row).

## Default Layout (Mitosis-BT)

* Press <kbd>Adjust</kbd> + <kbd>←</kbd> <kbd>↓</kbd> <kbd>↑</kbd> <kbd>→</kbd> to switch between three Bluetooth devices and a receiver
* Press <kbd>Fn</kbd> + <kbd>Adjust</kbd> + <kbd>←</kbd> <kbd>↓</kbd> <kbd>↑</kbd> <kbd>→</kbd> to reset three corresponding Bluetooth devices or erase all bonds


[![](https://kle-render.herokuapp.com/api/3f5dd1c848bb9a7a723161ad5e0c8e39?6)](http://www.keyboard-layout-editor.com/#/gists/3f5dd1c848bb9a7a723161ad5e0c8e39)

## Building

### IAR

Open mitosis-bluetooth.eww, hit Make, that's it.
I'm using a single plate (reversed) version for
the Debug configuration (modules soldered to the top of the PCB),
to debug standard version remove `COMPILE_REVERSED` from the preprocessor directives or switch
to Release configuration.

### GCC

As usual, change directory to custom/armgcc, make.
Working GCC linker settings for softdevice s130 2.0.0 and [YJ-14015] modules (256K ROM, 16K RAM) appear to be:
```
  FLASH (rx) : ORIGIN = 0x1b000, LENGTH = 0x25000
  RAM (rwx) :  ORIGIN = 0x20002000, LENGTH = 0x2000
```

## Debugging

You can hook up a single UART RX pin at 115200 baud ([currently pin 21, key S15 or S23](https://i.imgur.com/apx8W8W.png)).
You will also need common GND and VCC to make it work. It doesn't really interfere much with the keyboard matrix so you can use any pin you want,
just don't use the same pin for TX and RX to avoid feedback.

You can also use [$1.80](https://www.aliexpress.com/item//32583160323.html) STM32 board,
upgrade it with UART adapter ([RX - A9, TX - A10](https://i.imgur.com/sLyYM27.jpg))
into a [Blackmagic] board,
and use it as an [ST-LINK/V2] replacement ([SWCLK - A5, SWDIO - B14](https://i.imgur.com/Ikt8yZz.jpg)).
It is actually much better because it also has a built in UART ([pin A3][pinout])
on the second virtual COM port so you don't need another USB.
See https://github.com/joric/mitosis/tree/devel#bluepill

I'm using [nRF5 SDK 11] (mostly because original Mitosis using it).
There's no softdevice s110 support so we are limited to 6K RAM.
Bluetooth devices seem to shutdown and restart a lot (sleep mode is actually power off mode
with a hardware interrupt from the pin that restarts the device).

There is a built in app_trace_log but it doesn't work with GCC (probably lacks free memory)
so I had to write a small drop-in replacement, but in IAR you can just use the following preprocessor
directives (the last one is optional if it's too verbose):

```
DEBUG
NRF_LOG_USES_UART=1
NRF_LOG_ENABLED=1
ENABLE_DEBUG_LOG_SUPPORT=1
DM_DISABLE_LOGS=1
```

## Status

### Works

* Bluetooth and Gazell timesharing
* Battery level reporting via Bluetooth
* Debugging via UART
* Basic QMK layout support
* Bluetooth pairing shortcut
* Switching between RF and Bluetooth modes
* Switching between Bluetooth devices

### TODO

* Full QMK/TMK suport (maybe)

#### QMK support is still in progress (Mitosis-Bluetooth compiles fine without QMK)

QMK firwmare has massive incompatibility issues with ICCARM (IAR) that can't be fixed with preprocessor.
So it's either a fully-GCC setup (armgcc and maybe uVision Keil) or patching QMK
(changes are small but I don't know if they ever get merged to the upstream).
I've patched and compiled QMK for ICCARM but couldn't get correct keycodes so far.

#### QMK incompatibility issues

* Excessive and unnecessary binary literals (e.g. `0b011` is C++14 only), should use hex or decimals
* GCC-specific switch case ranges (`case A ... Z`, ), should use `if` and `else`
* GCC-specific `__attribute__` keyword, e.g. `__attribute__ ((weak))`, should use `__WEAK` define
* Inplace initializations (`#define MACRO(...) ({static const macro_t __m[]; PROGMEM={__VA_ARGS__}; &__m[0]})`)


#### Patching QMK for IAR

* add `#ifdef __ICCARM__` for IAR-specific code
* add `__attribute__(x)=`  to the preprocessor directives, use `__weak` or whatever instead
* add dummy Atmel-specific variables and functions `PORTF`, `PORTD`, etc.

#### QMK embedding guide

* add `QMK_KEYBOARD_H="your_hardware_name.h"` to the preprocessor directives
* add `#include "keyboard.h"`, add QMK paths (quantum/, tmk_core/common/, etc.)
* implement `timer_read32()` if it's incompatible (e.g. use `app_timer_cnt_get` for nrf5x)
* implement `matrix_row_t matrix_get_row(uint8_t row)` callback (just read from array)
* implement host driver callbacks, add `host_set_driver(&driver)` to the init sequence
* add `keyboard_task()` to the main loop

See this GCC-only TMK core-based project for example (all API calls are precisely the same):

* https://github.com/Lotlab/nrf51822-keyboard

## References

* [My fork of the Mitosis repository (bonus documentation included)](https://github.com/joric/mitosis/tree/devel)
* [Reddit thread](https://redd.it/91s4pu)

[mitosis-bt.hex]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/joric/mitosis/devel/precompiled_iar/mitosis-bt.hex
[ST-LINK/V2]: http://www.ebay.com/itm/331803020521
[OpenOCD]: http://www.freddiechopin.info/en/download/category/10-openocd-dev
[YJ-14015]: https://www.ebay.com/itm/282575577879
[Blackmagic]: https://gojimmypi.blogspot.com/2017/07/BluePill-STM32F103-to-BlackMagic-Probe.html
[nRF5 SDK 11]: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF5_SDK/nRF5_SDK_v11.x.x/nRF5_SDK_11.0.0_89a8197.zip
[pinout]: https://i.imgur.com/apx8W8W.png
[RAM]: https://devzone.nordicsemi.com/b/blog/posts/rom-and-ram-management

Commit message:

removed merged s130 to comply with nordic license, build script changes

mitosis-bluetooth/README.md, after:

# Mitosis-Bluetooth

Bluetooth firmware for the Mitosis keyboard (BLE and Gazell timesharing via timeslot API)

## Video

[![](http://img.youtube.com/vi/Qv22OyWb81g/0.jpg)](https://youtu.be/Qv22OyWb81g)

## Precompiled Firmware

* [mitosis-bt.hex] (firmware upgrade for the right half, turns Mitosis into a fully wireless split Bluetooth HID keyboard)

You need to flash the right half only. Use [ST-LINK/V2] and [OpenOCD].

```
openocd -f interface/stlink-v2.cfg -f target/nrf51.cfg ^
-c init -c "reset halt" -c "flash write_image erase mitosis-bt.hex" -c reset -c exit
```

Precompiled firmware is NOT merged with softdevice s130 2.0.0 because it violates Nordic license,
so you need to flash softdevice first, the same way (just once).
Current firmware version switches into a System Off mode after a few minutes of inactivity to save the battery,
and wakes up on hardware interrupt (any key, usually you press something on a home row).

## Default Layout (Mitosis-BT)

* Press <kbd>Adjust</kbd> + <kbd>←</kbd> <kbd>↓</kbd> <kbd>↑</kbd> <kbd>→</kbd> to switch between three Bluetooth devices and a receiver
* Press <kbd>Fn</kbd> + <kbd>Adjust</kbd> + <kbd>←</kbd> <kbd>↓</kbd> <kbd>↑</kbd> <kbd>→</kbd> to reset three corresponding Bluetooth devices or erase all bonds


[![](https://kle-render.herokuapp.com/api/3f5dd1c848bb9a7a723161ad5e0c8e39?6)](http://www.keyboard-layout-editor.com/#/gists/3f5dd1c848bb9a7a723161ad5e0c8e39)

## Building

### IAR

Open mitosis-bluetooth.eww, hit Make, that's it.
I'm using a single plate (reversed) version for
the Debug configuration (modules soldered to the top of the PCB),
to debug standard version remove `COMPILE_REVERSED` from the preprocessor directives or switch
to Release configuration.

### GCC

As usual, change directory to custom/armgcc, make.
Working GCC linker settings for softdevice s130 2.0.0 and [YJ-14015] modules (256K ROM, 16K RAM) appear to be:
```
  FLASH (rx) : ORIGIN = 0x1b000, LENGTH = 0x25000
  RAM (rwx) :  ORIGIN = 0x20002000, LENGTH = 0x2000
```

To build with this settings, set stack and heap to 1024 or something in gcc_startup_nrf51.S (originally 2048). Erasing the chip and flashing merged hex also might help. You could also use Makefile:

```
ASMFLAGS += -D__HEAP_SIZE=1024 -D__STACK_SIZE=1024
```

## Debugging

You can hook up a single UART RX pin at 115200 baud ([currently pin 21, key S15 or S23](https://i.imgur.com/apx8W8W.png)).
You will also need common GND and VCC to make it work. It doesn't really interfere much with the keyboard matrix so you can use any pin you want,
just don't use the same pin for TX and RX to avoid feedback.

You can also use [$1.80](https://www.aliexpress.com/item//32583160323.html) STM32 board,
upgrade it with UART adapter ([RX - A9, TX - A10](https://i.imgur.com/sLyYM27.jpg))
into a [Blackmagic] board,
and use it as an [ST-LINK/V2] replacement ([SWCLK - A5, SWDIO - B14](https://i.imgur.com/Ikt8yZz.jpg)).
It is actually much better because it also has a built in UART ([pin A3][pinout])
on the second virtual COM port so you don't need another USB.
See https://github.com/joric/mitosis/tree/devel#bluepill

I'm using [nRF5 SDK 11] (mostly because original Mitosis using it).
There's no softdevice s110 support so we are limited to 6K RAM.
Bluetooth devices seem to shutdown and restart a lot (sleep mode is actually power off mode
with a hardware interrupt from the pin that restarts the device).

There is a built in app_trace_log but it doesn't work with GCC (probably lacks free memory)
so I had to write a small drop-in replacement, but in IAR you can just use the following preprocessor
directives (the last one is optional if it's too verbose):

```
DEBUG
NRF_LOG_USES_UART=1
NRF_LOG_ENABLED=1
ENABLE_DEBUG_LOG_SUPPORT=1
DM_DISABLE_LOGS=1
```

## Status

### Works

* Bluetooth and Gazell timesharing
* Battery level reporting via Bluetooth
* Debugging via UART
* Basic QMK layout support
* Bluetooth pairing shortcut
* Switching between RF and Bluetooth modes
* Switching between Bluetooth devices

### TODO

* Full QMK/TMK suport (maybe)

#### QMK support is still in progress (Mitosis-Bluetooth compiles fine without QMK)

QMK firwmare has massive incompatibility issues with ICCARM (IAR) that can't be fixed with preprocessor.
So it's either a fully-GCC setup (armgcc and maybe uVision Keil) or patching QMK
(changes are small but I don't know if they ever get merged to the upstream).
I've patched and compiled QMK for ICCARM but couldn't get correct keycodes so far.

#### QMK incompatibility issues

* Excessive and unnecessary binary literals (e.g. `0b011` is C++14 only), should use hex or decimals
* GCC-specific switch case ranges (`case A ... Z`, ), should use `if` and `else`
* GCC-specific `__attribute__` keyword, e.g. `__attribute__ ((weak))`, should use `__WEAK` define
* Inplace initializations (`#define MACRO(...) ({static const macro_t __m[]; PROGMEM={__VA_ARGS__}; &__m[0]})`)


#### Patching QMK for IAR

* add `#ifdef __ICCARM__` for IAR-specific code
* add `__attribute__(x)=`  to the preprocessor directives, use `__weak` or whatever instead
* add dummy Atmel-specific variables and functions `PORTF`, `PORTD`, etc.

#### QMK embedding guide

* add `QMK_KEYBOARD_H="your_hardware_name.h"` to the preprocessor directives
* add `#include "keyboard.h"`, add QMK paths (quantum/, tmk_core/common/, etc.)
* implement `timer_read32()` if it's incompatible (e.g. use `app_timer_cnt_get` for nrf5x)
* implement `matrix_row_t matrix_get_row(uint8_t row)` callback (just read from array)
* implement host driver callbacks, add `host_set_driver(&driver)` to the init sequence
* add `keyboard_task()` to the main loop

See this GCC-only TMK core-based project for example (all API calls are precisely the same):

* https://github.com/Lotlab/nrf51822-keyboard

## References

* [My fork of the Mitosis repository (bonus documentation included)](https://github.com/joric/mitosis/tree/devel)
* [Reddit thread](https://redd.it/91s4pu)

[mitosis-bt.hex]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/joric/mitosis/devel/precompiled/mitosis-bt.hex
[ST-LINK/V2]: http://www.ebay.com/itm/331803020521
[OpenOCD]: http://www.freddiechopin.info/en/download/category/10-openocd-dev
[YJ-14015]: https://www.ebay.com/itm/282575577879
[Blackmagic]: https://gojimmypi.blogspot.com/2017/07/BluePill-STM32F103-to-BlackMagic-Probe.html
[nRF5 SDK 11]: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF5_SDK/nRF5_SDK_v11.x.x/nRF5_SDK_11.0.0_89a8197.zip
[pinout]: https://i.imgur.com/apx8W8W.png
[RAM]: https://devzone.nordicsemi.com/b/blog/posts/rom-and-ram-management
